TITLE: MCP4EDA: LLM-Powered Model Context Protocol RTL-to-GDSII Automation with Backend Aware Synthesis Optimization
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2507.19570v1

MCP4EDA: LLM-Powered Model Context Protocol
RTL-to-GDSII Automation with Backend Aware
Synthesis Optimization
Yiting Wang1,∗, Wanghao Ye1,∗, Yexiao He1, Yiran Chen2, Gang Qu1, Ang Li1,†
1Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, United States
2Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, United States
∗Equal contribution
†Corresponding author: angliece@umd.edu
Abstract—This paper presents MCP4EDA, the first Model
Context Protocol server that enables Large Language Models
(LLMs) to control and optimize the complete open-source RTL-
to-GDSII design flow through natural language interaction. The
system integrates Yosys synthesis, Icarus Verilog simulation,
OpenLane place-and-route, GTKWave analysis, and KLayout
visualization into a unified LLM-accessible interface, enabling
designers to execute complex multi-tool EDA workflows con-
versationally via AI assistants such as Claude Desktop and
Cursor IDE. The principal contribution is a backend-aware
synthesis optimization methodology wherein LLMs analyze actual
post-layout timing, power, and area metrics from OpenLane
results to iteratively refine synthesis TCL scripts, establishing a
closed-loop optimization system that bridges the traditional gap
between synthesis estimates and physical implementation reality.
In contrast to conventional flows that rely on wire-load models, this
methodology leverages real backend performance data to guide
synthesis parameter tuning, optimization sequence selection, and
constraint refinement, with the LLM functioning as an intelligent
design space exploration agent. Experimental evaluation on
representative digital designs demonstrates 15-30% improvements
in timing closure and 10-20% area reduction compared to default
synthesis flows, establishing MCP4EDA as the first practical LLM-
controlled end-to-end open-source EDA automation system. The
code and demo are avaiable at: http://www.agent4eda.com/
Index Terms—Model Context Protocol, Electronic Design
Automation, Large Language Models, Synthesis Optimization
I. INTRODUCTION
The RTL-to-GDSII flow represents the most complex and
labor-intensive aspect of chip design, transforming Register
Transfer Level (RTL) descriptions into manufacturable Graphic
Data System II (GDSII) layouts through a sophisticated
sequence of logic synthesis, physical design, timing closure,
and verification stages. This process requires expertise across
multiple specialized domains, involving intricate tool interac-
tions, parameter tuning, and iterative optimization to achieve
competitive Power, Performance, and Area (PPA) objectives.
With chip manufacturing demand at unprecedented levels and
design complexity growing exponentially, the manual nature
of synthesis script generation and design flow orchestration
has become a critical bottleneck.
Current RTL-to-GDSII workflows provide generic design
flows but are fundamentally limited by fixed template-based
approaches. The design space is constrained to only a few
fixed patterns, resulting in low design closure success rates and
poor design quality. To ensure high-quality designs, customized
design flows are essential. However, design space exploration
requires extensive expertise and domain knowledge to calibrate
and configure numerous design factors and tool settings.
Machine learning tools like Flowtune [1] provide design
choice calibration, but lack backend-aware customization.
Traditional synthesis flows rely on Wire Load Models (WLM)
for delay estimation, which become increasingly inaccurate at
advanced nodes [2], making synthesis-only tuning insufficient.
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated transfor-
mative potential in Electronic Design Automation (EDA), with
existing approaches introducing significant improvements in
workflow automation efficiency. Researchers have demonstrated
LLM’s potential to automate various aspects of the RTL-to-
GDSII process. These applications span hardware description
language (HDL) code generation [3]–[8], debugging [9], and
optimization [10], [11], as well as synthesis script creation [4],
[12]. Beyond these individual tasks, comprehensive research has
explored using LLMs for complete RTL-to-GDSII workflows
by creating integrated flows that combine tool calls and API
calls [4], [13], [14]. These previous works have significantly
reduced design labor costs.
However, current LLM-based approaches exhibit significant
limitations documented in recent literature. Most existing
methods rely on fixed API calling patterns rather than dynamic
tool selection, constraining their adaptability to varying design
requirements. Furthermore, existing systems implement LLM
integration through predetermined synthesis and implementa-
tion flows, preventing dynamic design-based tool selection or
adaptive execution strategies based on intermediate results. The
generation processes also require excessive time due to token
limits and restart requirements, hampering practical deployment.
Additionally, the scalability of these approaches remains limited,
as adding more functionalities or tools to the system presents
considerable challenges.
To address the challenges in RTL-to-GDSII automation, this
arXiv:2507.19570v1  [cs.AR]  25 Jul 2025
paper proposes MCP4EDA, the first Model Context Protocol
(MCP) server that enables seamless interaction between LLMs
and open-source EDA toolchains. MCP4EDA provides a unified
interface that allows LLMs to dynamically orchestrate complete
open-source RTL-to-GDSII flows through natural language
interaction. The framework also implements backend-aware
synthesis optimization by creating a closed-loop feedback
mechanism between synthesis decisions and actual physical
implementation results.
The challenge of fixed template workflows in current
RTL-to-GDSII flows is addressed through MCP4EDA’s flexible
protocol architecture, which enables dynamic tool sequence
composition and adaptive strategy execution. This approach
replaces predetermined scripts with intelligent workflow or-
chestration, allowing the system to adapt tool sequences based
on design requirements and intermediate results.
The issue of backend-unaware synthesis optimization
is tackled through a closed-loop optimization methodology
where LLMs analyze actual post-layout metrics from physical
implementation results to iteratively refine synthesis scripts.
This approach replaces the traditional reliance on inaccurate
Wire Load Models (WLM) with real backend performance
data, enabling synthesis decisions that are informed by actual
physical implementation constraints and parasitic effects.
The limitation of rigid API call patterns that constrain LLM
capabilities and result in suboptimal performance is resolved
through MCP’s tool calling architecture. This framework
provides quantified efficiency gains by enabling intelligent
tool selection with interactions throughout the design process,
allowing LLMs to maintain context and make informed deci-
sions based on accumulated design knowledge and feedback.
The challenge of insufficient dynamic tool selection is
addressed through MCP4EDA’s agent-based architecture, which
enables LLMs to function as intelligent orchestration agents.
These agents make sequential decisions based on real-time
design metrics and intermediate results, dynamically selecting
appropriate tools and optimization strategies as the design
progresses through the implementation flow.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
1) Novel MCP-based EDA Architecture: First Open-
Source MCP server for comprehensive RTL-to-GDSII
automation enabling natural language control of inte-
grated open-source EDA toolchains.
2) Backend-Aware
Synthesis
Optimization:
Closed-
loop methodology bridging documented synthesis-
implementation gaps using actual post-layout metrics
for parameter tuning.
3) Dynamic LLM-Controlled Design Flow: Adaptive
orchestration leveraging MCP’s proven efficiency advan-
tages for selective step execution and iterative refinement.
4) Comprehensive Evaluation Framework: We establish
a rigorous design benchmark suite comprising hand-
selected designs from OpenCores and various open-
source repositories, systematically demonstrating 1-30%
critical path improvements and 5-30% area reduction
compared to default synthesis flows across diverse design
complexities.
II. BACKGROUND
Traditional RTL-to-GDSII workflows, such as OpenLane
and OpenRoad [15] [16], remain fundamentally constrained
by predetermined design flows and rigid orchestration method-
ologies. The diversity of EDA tasks and the specialized
nature of hardware description languages present fundamental
challenges for automation, which normally require extensive
human labor and expertise. Industry research confirms that
point-tool solutions create silos where design changes trigger
complete flow re-runs, while design space exploration remains
constrained by substantial computational costs [17], [18].
Another challenge in design space exploration is that
classical synthesis optimization faces significant challenges
due to its reliance on Wire Load Models (WLMs), which
provide statistical approximations rather than actual routing
characteristics, leading to poor correlation between synthesis
estimates and physical implementation [17]. While synthesis-
to-place-and-route timing correlation achieved 3-4% accuracy
at older nodes, significant gaps emerge at 28nm and below
where interconnect parasitics dominate and WLM reliability
degrades [19]. Backend feedback limitations exacerbate these
correlation gaps, with timing violations discovered only after
place-and-route, necessitating expensive iteration cycles.
Design space exploration compounds these issues through
computational complexity. The exponential growth in optimiza-
tion combinations makes exhaustive search unfeasible [20],
while traditional approaches suffer from either fixed optimiza-
tion patterns with inadequate coverage or vast explorations
lacking sufficient guidance [21]. The complexity of directive
combinations while simultaneously balancing timing, area, and
power constraints remains a fundamental challenge [22].
Current LLMs show promise for design space exploration
due to their strong generation capabilities and rule understand-
ing. However, existing integration approaches face several key
limitations. First, they rely on fixed API calling sequences
and predetermined synthesis flows, preventing dynamic tool
selection or adaptive execution strategies [6], [23]. This
constrains LLMs within predetermined boundaries, limiting
intelligent design space exploration and conditional tool ex-
ecution capabilities. Second, performance issues arise from
excessive generation times due to token limits and restart
requirements [7], [14]. Third, technical constraints include
limited hardware-related knowledge in pretrained models and
difficulties with specialized HDL syntax, necessitating exten-
sive domain-specific fine-tuning [12]. These fixed integration
patterns prevent the dynamic, adaptive approaches needed for
effective design space exploration [24], [25].
Model Context Protocol addresses integration challenges by
providing standardized interfaces for AI-tool communication,
though academic evaluation of its effectiveness in EDA con-
texts remains limited. MCP enables standardized connections
between AI models and external data sources through a
client-server architecture that maintains stateful sessions [26].
The protocol facilitates dynamic tool discovery and reduces
integration complexity from M×N custom connectors to M+N
standardized implementations. Standardized messaging proto-
cols enable seamless interaction across diverse systems while
breaking down data silos [27]. Security frameworks incorporate
authentication mechanisms for remote server connections and
flexible resource management through server-initiated comple-
tion requests. However, the protocol’s effectiveness for complex
EDA workflows, token efficiency improvements, and scalability
benefits require empirical validation through controlled studies.
Current academic literature lacks comprehensive performance
comparisons between MCP and traditional API approaches
in EDA-specific contexts, representing an important area for
future research.
III. METHODOLOGY
MCP-EDA WORKFLOW
MCP HOST
MCP CLIENT
MCP CLIENT
MCP CLIENT
MCP SERVER
Synthesis
TOOLS
TCL script generation 
Yosys + abc synthesis
Analyze backend results
+ Refine Scripts
Simulation
Icarus Verilog 
GTKWave view
OpenLane backend flow
OpenlLane design quality
assessment
Backend
Post
Response
Send context
Tool Request
LLM
Call
Response
KLayout GDSII file view
Tool Request
Feedback
Update
Fig. 1: MCP4EDA workflow architecture integrating Model
Context Protocol components with EDA tools for backend-
aware synthesis optimization. The MCP Host (Claude Desk-
top/Cursor IDE) provides natural language interface. Multiple
MCP Clients manage individual tool connections with stateful
sessions. The MCP Server orchestrates tool execution across
three domains: Simulation (Icarus Verilog, GTKWave), Synthe-
sis (TCL generation, Yosys [28]+abc [29], backend analysis),
and Backend (OpenLane flow, layout visualization, quality
assessment). The LLM receives real backend metrics through
feedback loops, enabling iterative script refinement based on
actual post-layout performance.
A. Solution to Challenge 1: Dynamic Workflow Architecture
MCP4EDA implements a flexible, adaptive workflow archi-
tecture replacing rigid predetermined sequences with intelligent,
context-aware design flow orchestration. The MCP Host serves
as the primary user interface through Claude Desktop or Cursor
IDE environments, providing natural language interaction
capabilities. Users specify design objectives, constraints, and
optimization targets through conversational prompts, eliminat-
ing manual tool configuration.
The host maintains session context across multiple design
iterations, enabling complex multi-step optimization workflows
Backend aware TCL optimization
Phase I: 
Fixed script Exploration
RTL Design
Input
Execute Fixed
Scripts
AREA
0-3
DELAY
0-4
OpenLane
Backend Flow
Area
(μm²)
Power
(mW)
Timing
(WNS/TNS)
Violations
Baselines with
Backend Metrics
Phase II: 
LLM Analysis 
LLM Backend
Analysis
RAG
Query
ABC
Manual
Yosys
Guide
Generate
Refinement
Strategy
Create
Optimized TCL
Script
Baseline
Patterns
Phase III: 
Iterative Refinement
Execute Refined
Script
OpenLane
Backend Flow
Collect New
Metrics
Final Optimized
Script
Improvement?
NO
YES
Fig. 2: Backend-aware TCL optimization workflow showing
three-phase iterative synthesis optimization. Phase I establishes
baseline metrics through fixed script exploration with OpenLane
backend execution. Phase II employs LLM analysis of backend
results using RAG query integration with ABC manual and
Yosys guides to generate optimized TCL scripts. Phase
III implements iterative refinement cycles, executing refined
scripts through OpenLane, collecting performance metrics, and
continuing optimization until convergence.
that adapt based on intermediate results. Unlike template-based
approaches following predetermined sequences, the MCP4EDA
architecture enables dynamic strategy execution where the
LLM modifies workflow sequences, skips unnecessary steps,
or introduces additional optimization stages based on real-time
assessment of design progress and constraints.
B. Backend-Aware Synthesis Optimization
MCP4EDA’s core innovation lies in backend-aware synthesis
optimization methodology, creating closed-loop feedback be-
tween synthesis decisions and actual physical implementation
results. This differs from traditional synthesis flows relying on
Wire Load Models or statistical approximations. The complete
optimization workflow (Figure 2) demonstrates the three-phase
iterative process for optimal synthesis configurations.
1) Phase I: Fixed Script Exploration and Baseline Establish-
ment: The optimization process begins with systematic baseline
establishment through fixed script exploration. The system
executes predefined synthesis scripts with varying optimization
levels (AREA 0-3, DELAY 0-4) to establish performance
baselines across the design space. Each configuration under-
goes complete OpenLane backend flow execution, generating
comprehensive metrics including area utilization (µm²), power
consumption (mW), timing performance (WNS/TNS), and
constraint violations.
This baseline exploration: (1) establishes performance bound-
aries and feasible optimization ranges, (2) identifies promising
LLM Prompt
Optimization Goal: Based on ABC synthesis doc-
umentation, and the ABC command with physical
results, focus on TIMING optimization.
Iteration 2: 3971.31 µm2 area, 0.88ns
critical path, 0.000578 µW power [
TIMING IMPROVED: 0.030ns].
+read_constr,${sdc_file};strash;dch;map -
B 0.85;buffer -c -N 4; upsize -c;map
-B 0.95;buffer -c ... -m
LLM Response
Recommended Optimization Strategy:
Applying balanced buffer mapping with enhanced
resynthesis sequence:
+read_constr,${sdc_file};strash;${abc_rf
};dch;map -B 0.87;buffer -c -N ... -m
Execution Result
Iteration 3: 3913.75 µm2 area, 0.86ns
critical path,
0.000538 µW power
Summary: The LLM-guided optimization achieved
timing improvement of 0.050ns and area reduc-
tion of 1.4%.
Fig. 3: Example LLM-Guided Synthesis Optimization with
Iterative Refinement
configuration patterns demonstrating effective optimization
trade-offs, and (3) provides ground-truth backend metrics
enabling accurate correlation between synthesis parameters
and physical implementation results.
2) Phase II: LLM-Guided Analysis and Refinement Strategy
Generation: Phase II leverages LLM capabilities for intelligent
analysis of backend results and strategic refinement generation.
The LLM analyzes backend results for timing violations, area
inefficiencies, power issues, and routing congestion.
The
analysis
incorporates
domain-specific
knowledge
through the integration of Retrieval-Augmented Genera-
tion(RAG) query with the ABC optimization manual and
Yosys synthesis guides, enabling access to specialized synthesis
knowledge and proven optimization strategies. This correlates
the observed performance with documented techniques to
generate refinement strategies for identified limitations.
The LLM generates optimized TCL scripts by analyzing
baseline patterns and applying targeted optimization strategies.
Unlike fixed template approaches, the LLM dynamically adjusts
optimization sequences, selects relevant synthesis algorithms,
and configures tool-specific parameters based on specific
performance characteristics observed in baseline exploration.
3) Phase III: Iterative Refinement and Convergence: The
final phase implements iterative refinement cycles where
optimized TCL scripts undergo execution through OpenLane
backend flow, generating new performance metrics for compar-
ison with baseline results. The system evaluates improvements
in timing, area, power, and design rule compliance.
When improvements are achieved, the system updates the
optimization baseline and initiates subsequent iterations, incor-
porating lessons from previous attempts. The LLM maintains
history to avoid revisiting unsuccessful configurations while
identifying promising optimization directions for exploration.
Refinement continues until design objectives are satisfied.
4) LLM-Guided TCL Script Generation: The synthesis
optimization process begins with LLM-driven TCL script
generation, where the language model analyzes RTL design
characteristics and user-specified constraints to generate op-
timized synthesis configurations. The LLM considers design
complexity, target frequency requirements, area constraints,
and power objectives to select appropriate synthesis strategies.
The script generation process incorporates domain-specific
knowledge about synthesis tool capabilities, optimization trade-
offs, and common design patterns. The LLM maintains aware-
ness of Yosys synthesis options, abc optimization algorithms,
and technology mapping strategies, enabling intelligent selec-
tion of synthesis flows tailored to specific design requirements.
Figure 3 demonstrates this iterative optimization approach,
where the LLM analyzes baseline performance metrics and
generates refined ABC command sequences.
5) Backend Metrics Analysis and Feedback: Following
synthesis and place-and-route execution through OpenLane,
the system extracts comprehensive backend metrics including
actual timing analysis results, real area utilization, power
consumption estimates, and routing congestion data. These
metrics represent ground-truth implementation characteristics
rather than synthesis-stage approximations.
The LLM analyzes backend results to identify performance
bottlenecks, timing violations, area inefficiencies, and power
optimization opportunities. This includes both quantitative
metrics and qualitative design analysis. For timing analysis, the
LLM examines critical path delays, setup and hold violations,
and clock skew characteristics. Area analysis considers standard
cell utilization, routing resource consumption, and macro
placement efficiency.
This backend-aware approach optimizes synthesis using
actual implementation data rather than estimates, resulting
in improved correlation between synthesis predictions and final
silicon performance.
C. Standardized LLM-EDA Integration
MCP4EDA leverages the Model Context Protocol to establish
standardized, flexible communication between Large Language
Models and EDA toolchains. The architecture implements a
three-tier structure consisting of MCP Host, MCP Clients, and
90000
95000
100000
Area ( m²)
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
Critical Path (ns)
APU
5000
6000
7000
Area ( m²)
1.5
2.0
GCD
4500
5000
5500
6000
Area ( m²)
1.2
1.4
1.6
ALU
6000
7000
8000
Area ( m²)
1.0
1.5
EQUVALENCE
Baseline-AREA
Baseline-DELAY
Optimized-TIMING
Optimized-AREA
Optimized-BALANCED
Fig. 4: Time vs Area (left) and APU Best Overall Optimization (right)
MCP Server components that collectively enable dynamic tool
orchestration and stateful workflow management.
MCP Clients function as protocol intermediaries, with each
client maintaining dedicated connections to specific tool cate-
gories within the EDA workflow. The multi-client architecture
provides: (1) isolation of tool failures preventing cascade errors
across the entire workflow, (2) parallel execution capabilities for
independent design steps, and (3) modular expansion allowing
new tools to be integrated without modifying existing client
connections.
Each client maintains state and context throughout optimiza-
tion cycles. This stateful approach enables the LLM to maintain
awareness of previous optimization attempts, intermediate
results, and design history, facilitating intelligent decision-
making that builds upon previous iterations.
D. Intelligent Tool Selection Framework
The MCP Server orchestrates intelligent tool execution
through domain-based organization enabling selective, context-
aware tool invocation. The server manages three primary
functional domains: The Simulation domain integrates Icarus
Verilog for RTL simulation and GTKWave for waveform
visualization. The Synthesis domain encompasses TCL script
generation, Yosys synthesis with abc optimization, and backend
result analysis capabilities. The Backend domain manages
OpenLane place-and-route flows, KLayout GDSII visualization,
and comprehensive design quality assessment tools.
This domain-based organization enables the LLM to function
as an intelligent design space exploration agent, selectively
invoking relevant toolsets based on current optimization ob-
jectives rather than following predetermined sequences. The
LLM dynamically selects tools, execution order, and parameters
based on design state and objectives.
The framework tracks optimization history to avoid failed
configurations and identify promising directions, transforming
rigid EDA workflows into adaptive optimization processes.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
The experimental evaluation of MCP4EDA’s backend-aware
synthesis optimization methodology was conducted using a
comprehensive suite of digital designs to assess performance
improvements across multiple optimization objectives. The
evaluation employed OpenLane v2.0 as the baseline implemen-
tation flow, comparing default synthesis configurations against
MCP4EDA’s LLM-guided optimization strategies.
A. Design Benchmark Suite
The experimental evaluation utilized a diverse collection
of RTL designs spanning different complexity levels and
application domains to ensure comprehensive assessment of
the optimization methodology. The benchmark suite consists of
nine distinct designs sourced primarily from OpenCores [30],
representing various digital signal processing, arithmetic, and
communication applications. All designs were synthesized
using the SkyWater Sky130 PDK 130nm technology library to
ensure consistency in physical implementation characteristics.
Three optimization approaches were evaluated to assess
MCP4EDA’s backend-aware synthesis effectiveness:
Baseline Configuration: To establish the effectiveness and
targeting effect of different optimization goals, OpenLane’s nine
existing synthesis options (DELAY 0-4 and AREA 0-3) were
executed on all benchmark designs. The best results in Delay
and Area are selected to represent ground-truth performance
metrics for comparison.
Fixed API Template: Synthesis optimization was performed
using fixed API calls with the Claude 4 Sonnet model, utilizing
existing physical metrics from the baseline configuration with-
out further feedback. This configuration represents traditional
template-based LLM integration approaches that lack iterative
backend-aware optimization capabilities.
MCP4EDA Backend-Aware: Physically-aware synthesis op-
timization was performed using multiple self-iterations with
the Claude 4 Sonnet model, incorporating real backend metrics
through the three-phase optimization workflow described in
the methodology section. This configuration represents the
full MCP4EDA framework with closed-loop feedback between
synthesis decisions and physical implementation results.
All designs were synthesized using Yosys synthesis tool,
and the generated netlists were subsequently processed through
OpenLane backend tools for place-and-route implementation,
ensuring consistent physical implementation flow across all
experimental configurations.
TABLE I: Design Performance Comparison: Timing and Area Results
Design
Base
Fixed API
MCP EDA
Base
Fixed API
MCP EDA
Delay (ns)
Delay (ns)
Delay (ns)
Area (µm²)
Area (µm²)
Area (µm²)
equivalence_resolver
0.81
0.74
0.74
5885.64
5990.75
5574.10
rs232
0.91
0.90
0.90
2781.42
2781.42
2781.42
gcd
2.29
2.00
1.47
5074.87
5009.80
4785.84
APU
2.69
2.64
2.64
86618.07
86618.07
86618.07
gcd
1.59
2.00
1.47
5042.34
5009.80
4785.84
UART_RTO
0.54
0.76
0.52
1726.66
1726.66
1707.89
P16C5x_ALU
1.14
1.24
1.13
4977.27
4977.27
4660.72
FSM
0.33
0.33
0.33
52550.40
53660.78
42040.32
divide
2.04
2.04
2.04
18830.56
20234.41
17902.17
Log2pipelined
0.55
0.55
0.55
5405.184
4057.64
3336.95
GeoMean
1.05
1.09
0.97
8360.21
8436.75
7566.24
Ratio
1
1.04
0.94
1
1.01
0.91
B. Experimental Results and Analysis
As shown in Figure 4, four designs are shown with
baseline and optimized synthesis to backend results approaches
measured and plotted respect of critical path and area, the
optimized results have reached the alignment between the
requirement (AREA, TIMING, BALANCED) and have also
reached the best performance in the required optimization goal
while keeping the other metric as uncompromised as possible.
The experimental results in Table I demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of MCP4EDA’s backend-aware synthesis optimization
methodology across the diverse benchmark suite. MCP4EDA
consistently achieves superior performance compared to both
baseline and fixed API template approaches, with geometric
mean results revealing a 6% improvement in timing perfor-
mance (0.94 ratio) and a 9% area utilization (0.91 ratio)
compared to the baseline configuration. In contrast, the fixed
API template approach shows degraded performance with
a 4% increase in timing delay and 1% increase in area,
highlighting the importance of backend-aware feedback in
synthesis optimization.
As illustrated in Figure 5, the execution time of the
MCP4EDA workflow exhibits significant variation across de-
signs of different complexities. The backend-aware synthesis
optimization employs an iterative refinement process, where
each iteration requires complete synthesis and place-and-route
execution. For smaller designs with approximately 5,000 µm²
area, each synthesis and routing iteration requires approximately
one minute of computation time. For larger designs with
areas around 50,000 µm², this duration reaches approximately
three minutes per iteration. The MCP inference overhead
remains consistent at approximately seven minutes per design,
independent of design complexity.
The experimental results demonstrate that despite compu-
tational overhead from iterative optimization cycles, runtime
scaling remains tractable for practical design configurations.
The primary overhead stems from physical implementation
phases—an intrinsic requirement of backend-aware optimiza-
tion that reflects necessary computational complexity for
accurate physical analysis. The strong alignment between
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Execution Time (min)
~5000 m²
~50000 m²
Collect Base Metrics
TCL Opt. Synthesis
TCL Opt. Routing
TCL Opt. Inference
MCP Inference
Fig. 5: Design Runtime Evaluation
user requirements and achieved physical metrics validates
MCP4EDA’s effectiveness.
V. LIMITATIONS
While MCP4EDA has demonstrated promising timing and
area improvements on nine open-source benchmarks under the
SkyWater Sky130 PDK, its scope remains limited to small-to-
medium RTL designs. Scaling to larger industrial blocks will
require addressing longer reports, larger scripts, and increased
tool runtime. The closed-loop workflow incurs non-negligible
compute and runtime overhead: each iteration requires a
full synthesis–place-and-route run plus LLM processing, and
convergence typically occurs in three to five iterations. Dynamic
and leakage power metrics were not systematically measured,
so the impact of backend-aware scripts on power consumption
remains unquantified. The framework relies on an off-the-shelf
general-purpose LLM (Claude 4) with RAG over Yosys/ABC
manuals; domain-specialized models or lightweight fine-tuning
could improve EDA-specific reasoning and script quality.
Finally, MCP4EDA currently orchestrates only open-source tools
and has not been evaluated with commercial synthesis or place-
and-route toolchains.
VI. CONCLUSION
MCP4EDA presents the first Model Context Protocol server
that demonstrates LLM-controlled end-to-end RTL-to-GDSII
automation with backend-aware synthesis optimization. The
system achieves significant performance improvements in
critical paths and area reductions compared to baseline synthesis
flows through its innovative closed-loop feedback methodology
that leverages real post-layout metrics rather than statistical
approximations. By integrating a series of open-source EDA
tools into a unified LLM-accessible interface, MCP4EDA
transforms rigid template-based EDA workflows into adaptive,
intelligent design space exploration processes. The experimental
evaluation across nine diverse RTL designs demonstrates
the framework’s effectiveness in bridging the traditional gap
between synthesis estimates and physical implementation
reality. Future work will focus on scaling to larger industrial
designs through hierarchical optimization and extending support
to closed-source commercial EDA tools to demonstrate broader
applicability across industry-standard workflows.
REFERENCES
[1] W. L. Neto, Y. Li, P.-E. Gaillardon, and C. Yu, “Flowtune: End-to-end
automatic logic optimization exploration via domain-specific multi-armed
bandit,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits and Systems (TCAD), 2022.
[2] S. Kumar, A. Sharma, and R. Patel, “Optimization of physically-aware
synthesis for digital implementation flow,” International Journal of
Engineering and Technology, vol. 7, no. 2.8, pp. 453–458, 2018.
[3] S. Liu, W. Fang, Y. Lu, J. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, and Z. Xie,
“Rtlcoder: Fully open-source and efficient llm-assisted rtl code generation
technique,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits and Systems, 2024.
[4] K. Chang, Y. Wang, H. Ren, M. Wang, S. Liang, Y. Han, H. Li, and
X. Li, “Chipgpt: How far are we from natural language hardware design,”
CoRR, vol. abs/2305.14019, 2023.
[5] J. Blocklove, S. Garg, R. Karri, and H. Pearce, “Chip-chat: Challenges
and opportunities in conversational hardware design,” in 5th ACM/IEEE
Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD, MLCAD.
IEEE, 2023.
[6] R. Zhong, X. Du, S. Kai, Z. Tang, S. Xu, H.-L. Zhen, J. Hao,
Q. Xu, M. Yuan, and J. Yan, “Llm4eda: Emerging progress in large
language models for electronic design automation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.12224, 2024.
[7] S. Liu, N. Pinckney, B. Khailany, and H. Ren, “Verilogeval: Evaluating
large language models for verilog code generation,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), 2023.
[8] Y. Wang, G. Sun, W. Ye, G. Qu, and A. Li, “Verireason: Reinforcement
learning with testbench feedback for reasoning-enhanced verilog
generation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.11849
[9] Y. Tsai, M. Liu, and H. Ren, “Rtlfixer: Automatically fixing RTL syntax
errors with large language model,” in Proceedings of the 61st ACM/IEEE
Design Automation Conference, DAC.
ACM, 2024.
[10] X. Yao, Y. Wang, X. Li, Y. Lian, C. Ran, L. Chen, M. Yuan, H. Xu,
and B. Yu, “Rtlrewriter: Methodologies for large models aided rtl code
optimization,” 09 2024.
[11] Y. Wang, W. Ye, P. Guo, Y. He, Z. Wang, Y. He, B. Tian, S. He, G. Sun,
Z. Shen, S. Chen, A. Srivastava, Q. Zhang, G. Qu, and A. Li, “Symrtlo:
Enhancing rtl code optimization with llms and neuron-inspired symbolic
reasoning,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.10369
[12] M. Liu, N. Pinckney, B. Khailany, and H. Ren, “Chipnemo: Domain-
adapted llms for chip design,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00176, 2023.
[13] Z. He, H. Wu, X. Zhang, X. Yao, S. Zheng, H. Zheng, and B. Yu,
“Chateda: A large language model powered autonomous agent for eda,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10204, 2024.
[14] J. Blocklove, S. Garg, R. Karri, and H. Pearce, “Chip-chat: Challenges
and opportunities in conversational hardware design,” in 2023 ACM/IEEE
5th Workshop on Machine Learning for CAD (MLCAD), 2023.
[15] T. Ajayi, D. Blaauw, T. Chan, C.-K. Cheng, V. A. Chhabria, D. K. Choo,
M. Coltella, S. Dobre, R. Dreslinski, M. Fogaça, S. Hashemi, A. Hosny,
A. B. Kahng, M. Kim, J. Li, Z. Liang, U. Mallappa, P. Penzes, G. Pradipta,
S. Reda, A. Samal, S. S. Sapatnekar, C. Sechen, V. Srinivas, W. Swartz,
D. Sylvester, D. Urquhart, L. Wang, M. Woo, and B. Xu, “Openroad:
Toward a self-driving, open-source digital layout implementation tool
chain,” in Proc. 56th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC),
2019.
[16] M. Shalan and T. Edwards, “Building openlane: A 130nm openroad-based
tapeout- proven flow : Invited paper,” in 2020 IEEE/ACM International
Conference On Computer Aided Design (ICCAD), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[17] L. E. Geralla, M. J. de Guzman, and J. A. Hora, “Optimization of
physically-aware synthesis for digital implementation flow,” International
Journal of Engineering and Technology, vol. 7, no. 2.11, pp. 31–34, 2018.
[18] ——, “Optimization of physically-aware synthesis for digital implemen-
tation flow,” International Journal of Engineering and Technology, vol. 7,
no. 2.11, pp. 31–34, 2018.
[19] Y. Zhang, K. Liu, and J. Chen, “Physically aware synthesis revisited:
Guiding technology mapping with primitive logic gate placement,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.07886, 2025.
[20] B. C. Schafer and Z. Wang, “High-level synthesis design space explo-
ration: Past, present, and future,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 39, no. 10, pp. 2628–2639,
2019.
[21] J. Yi, D. Lilja, and D. Hawkins, “Efficient system design space exploration
using machine learning techniques,” in Proc. 45th Annual Design
Automation Conference (DAC), 2008.
[22] Various Authors, “Design-space exploration - an overview,” ScienceDirect
Topics, 2019.
[23] J. Pan, G. Zhou, C.-C. Chang, I. Jacobson, J. Hu, and Y. Chen, “A
survey of research in large language models for electronic design
automation,” ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 30, no. 3,
Feb. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3715324
[24] S. Thakur, B. Ahmad, H. Pearce, B. Tan, B. Dolan-Gavitt, R. Karri, and
H. Pearce, “Verigen: A large language model for verilog code generation,”
ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic Systems, vol. 29,
no. 2, pp. 1–31, 2023.
[25] S. Thakur, B. Ahmad, Z. Fan, H. Pearce, B. Tan, R. Karri,
B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. Garg, “Benchmarking large language models
for automated verilog rtl code generation,” 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.11140
[26] Anthropic, “Model context protocol specification,” Anthropic, Tech. Rep.,
March 2025.
[27] X. Hou, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, and L. Liu, “Model context protocol (mcp):
Landscape, security threats, and future research directions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.23278, 2025.
[28] C. Wolf, J. Glaser, and J. Kepler, “Yosys-a free verilog synthesis suite,”
in Proceedings of the Forum on Specification and Design Languages
(FDL), 2013, yosys is the first open-source Verilog synthesis suite
supporting a wide range of synthesizable Verilog features. [Online].
Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:202611483
[29] R. Brayton and A. Mishchenko, “ABC: An academic industrial-strength
verification tool,” in Computer Aided Verification: 22nd International
Conference, CAV 2010, Edinburgh, UK, July 15–19, 2010. Proceedings
22.
Springer, 2010, pp. 24–40.
[30] “OpenCores,” https://opencores.org/.
